[MUSIC PLAYING]
[AUDIO LOGO]
>> All right.
So this is from a very
interesting piece that was
written way back in 1963, "The
World-Year of the Persians."
It's published in the Journal of
the American Oriental Society.
"The notion of cyclically
recurrent cosmic disasters,
a catastrophe by flood
alternating with one by fire--
has been traced from
ancient Babylonia and Iran
through Pythagorean
and Stoic philosophy,
and thence into
the medieval world.
In classical Greek and
Hellenistic literature,
the doctrine of the 'Great
Year' was already connected with
the myths of the
Deluge and Ekpyrosis."
Now, Deluge is the destruction
of the world by water.
Ekpyrosis is the destruction
of the world by fire.
And you know if
you read the Bible,
it's almost like bookends.
You've got the Deluge of Noah
in the recounted beginning.
It's third through seventh
chapters of Genesis.
And then you've got
the apocalyptic visions
in the book of Revelations,
which is primarily
describing destruction by fire.
And those are the two
bookends of the sacred Judeo--
the Christian scriptures.
But those same ideas we find
all over the ancient world.
This was not something
that was limited to one
particular cultural group.
I think the reason for that
is in a very strong case can
be made is that
yes, there really
have been tremendous
catastrophes that afflict
this planet from time to time.
Our ancestors survived
some of these catastrophes.
And the catastrophes did
involve gigantic fires
and gigantic floods.
So we're going to look a little
bit at the floods, first of all,
but we're going to see this
what I call the wheel of time.
And what I've done
is here is I've
broken up the wheel into 12.
And you can see
down here is Leo,
and right up here would be
the cusp of Pisces, Aquarius.
So this would be 0 years--
BP stands for Before Present.
And 25,920 years BP that
would have been one cycle ago.
The vernal equinox would have
been stationed right in here.
If we go across this
half of a cycle ago,
12,960 years before present,
we're within a few decades
of an event that is known
as the Younger Dryas.
How many have you
ever heard that term?
All of you I hope by now.
There was a time not too
long ago when I said,
how many have heard
of the Younger Dryas?
No hands would have gone up.
So we're making progress here.
[APPLAUSE]
Well, I also have to give
credit to my good friend Graham
Hancock.
He has done as much, if not
more, and other researchers
but maybe not quite as
well known at this time.
But yes, I have been
very much trying
to get this insight
about our past history
out for going on decades now.
So anyways, if we
go back through,
like notice here if we
go back 2,160 years ago,
now we're at the cusp
of Aries, Pisces.
Go back to that little
further in about 4,320,
and we're at the cusp
of Taurus, Aries.
Go back one more, and we're
at 6,480 Before Present.
Now, here's something
very interesting.
And I'm going to show you.
Actually, we'll just
jump to the next slide.
But, first of all,
I'm just going
to call your attention
to these numbers
because these are
numbers that are
part of the sacred
canon of numerology,
if you want to call it that.
These are numbers that we
find over and over again
in the measurement
of time cycles
but also in the measurement
of geometric relationships.
Key numbers.
So if we go back right
here, 6,480 years ago,
I'll go to the next slide.
And what I've done here is
this is a very in-depth going
through the
scientific literature
cataloging what would
be catastrophic events.
My criteria that
I've used is trying
to discern events which
if they happened today
would seriously stress if not
eliminate modern civilization.
So that's the
magnitude of severity
that I used as my criteria.
And we can look
at this, and we're
going to see that there's a lot
of things arrayed around here.
Interestingly, the axis
that we're on right now
seems to be the one that's the
most prolifically represented
by catastrophic events.
You can see here, like Heinrich
event 5 happened 21,600 years
ago.
What was that?
Well, Heinrich events
are events where--
One of the things
that's been going
on since the beginning
of the Pleistocene epoch,
which goes back 2.6
million years ago,
interestingly, when you figure
that, I think maybe 2.6 million.
Well, that's 2,600,000.
Maybe it's closer to
2,580,200, something like that
because it's very, very close
to being like 100 precessional
cycles, or is it 1,000?
Doesn't matter.
You get the point.
But anyways, what happens
during a Heinrich event?
Well, if we go back--
and we're going to be talking
about this in a little more
depth-- if we go back 15,000
years, 20,000 years ago,
the world was in the
grip of a great Ice Age.
Now, what does that mean?
Well, for one thing, it means
that the average temperature
of the globe was at least
10 degrees colder than now.
It also means that there was
more than double the amount
of glacial ice that we now find.
Think about this, North
America-- more than half
of North America had a giant
ice sheet on it as big or bigger
than the one that now
covers the South Pole.
It might have been a 1 and a 1/2
to 2 miles thick over its over
its core over Central Canada.
It reached from the
Atlantic to the Pacific
and from the Northern United
States up to the Arctic Circle.
Northern cities like New York,
Boston, Philadelphia, Detroit,
Chicago, Milwaukee, The Twin
Cities, Seattle, Portland,
they were all buried under
thousands of feet of ice.
Now, in a geological frame,
this is no time at all.
Now, obviously, there were
people living on the planet
during that Ice Age.
And, to this day,
I have challenged
many proponents of
the climate crisis
that we're supposedly now in.
I've challenged them
to explain to me, OK,
given that the
science is settled
and there is a consensus about
what drives climate change,
let's look at some of the
most extreme climate changes
that we can document.
And this is the transition
into and out of a glacial age.
What's going on there?
Nobody can explain it
because it's still a mystery.
And the problem is
there were models,
but how do you get
out of an Ice Age?
Well, Milenkovic forces,
which are very slow,
which would require tens
of thousands of years.
50,000, 60,000, 70,000 years,
those were the old models.
But now with much improved
dating and precision,
we can say that, yeah, most of
that ice was gone in three major
pulses in about 3,000 years.
How do you explain that?
In fact, this was realized in
the early '70s by scientists who
were looking at the rapidity
with which the ice came
and left, and they ended
up scratching their heads.
They coined the
term energy paradox.
Because, obviously, if you've
got 6,000,000 or 7,000,000
million cubic miles of ice
piled up on the continents,
there's another
consequence of that.
One is that that's,
ultimately, seawater
that's been evaporated
out of the oceans,
precipitated out, and
then never melted.
It just piled up as glacial ice.
Sea levels dropped.
So during the late
glacial maximum,
if we go back 14,000
to 20,000 years ago,
sea levels are 400 feet
lower than now, 400.
Now, what did that mean?
Well, what it did was it
exposed the continental shelves
of every continent on Earth.
And about as much land was
reclaimed by the dropping
of sea level as was lost
because it was swallowed up
under glacial ice.
Now, during ice ages,
the most benign place
that you're going to try
to establish a settlement
or a colony or even a city
would be along coastlines.
Well, those coastlines are
under 400 feet of water now.
This is why I say that
the future of archaeology
is probably going to
be under the oceans
because we're just beginning
to realize that there was
a whole lot of stuff going
on those exposed continental
shelves.
But now we have this pulse
where the glaciers have grown.
They've shrunk away.
Sea level goes down.
It comes up.
It goes down, and it comes up.
And it's probably done this
a couple of dozen times,
perhaps throughout the course
of the Pleistocene, which,
like I said, goes back
2.6 million years.
Now, we have epochs in
geological timekeeping.
And then the Pleistocene
was an epoch.
And the Holocene, which is
the period we're in now,
is also an epoch.
Well, the current length of the
Holocene is given as 11,600.
So this raises an
interesting question,
is the Holocene really
a completely separate
geological epoch different
from the Pleistocene,
or is it simply
another variation
within the Pleistocene itself?
Now, what characterizes the
Pleistocene from the preceding
epoch, the Pliocene, is that
there was a major climatic shift
right at 2.6 million years ago.
And this is when we begin to see
this oscillation of the planet
between glacial and
interglacial ages,
back and forth, back and forth.
And that's what defines
and distinguishes
the Pleistocene from the
previous rather steady state
warm condition of the Pliocene.
So the question in my mind
is, is the Holocene really
a distinct geological
epoch, or is it just
a sub epoch within
the Pleistocene?
Well, here's the
interesting thing,
with our high-resolution
reconstructions of climate
now going back a quarter
of a million years
based upon ever-improving
dating technologies,
we can see that within the
last quarter million years,
there have been maybe four
cycles, glacial, interglacial.
And the interglacial
like that we're in now,
the Holocene, when we
look at the duration
of the previous
ones, we've already
outlasted the previous ones
by a couple of thousand years.
What does that mean?
Well, I don't know, other than
the fact that if the duration
of an interglacial is
8,000 or 10,000 years,
we're going on 11,600 years now.
11,600 years is the date now
given to the transition between
Pleistocene and Holocene.
That date to me, it was
always really interesting.
Why?
Because even before that
date was honed in on back
in the '70s when I first started
reading Plato and reading about
Atlantis, I learned that the
Egyptian priests told Solon that
Atlantis subsided 9,000 years
before Solon's journey to Egypt,
which occurred 2,600 years ago.
So, in other words, Plato
is telling us that something
happened, a major catastrophe
happened 11,600 years ago.
And we now know that is the
upper, Younger Dryas boundary.
The Younger Dryas period lasted
from right at 12,900 to 11,600
years ago, about 1,300 years.
And it was associated with what
is called meltwater pulse 1B.
In other words, marine
geologists and oceanographers
have identified a point in
time where over very short
duration sea levels
massively rose.
In other words, the
rising of the sea levels
from 400 feet lower
to the present level
didn't happen smooth.
It happened in a series of
tremendous, powerful pulses
of meltwater.
So this is where I think the
origins of the Great Flood
myths, ultimately, came from.
And one of the things
that I would mention
is that I see that there are
three possible mechanisms
by which you could produce
catastrophic floods.
One is the rapidly melting
ice sheets of the glaciers.
Then you would also have
the corresponding rapid rise
of sea level.
The other is that there
would be tremendous prolonged
torrential rain falls.
And I'll get into it in a second
what could provoke such a thing.
And the third is now
the newly emerging
or consistently emerging new
evidence for gigantic tsunamis
that have swept over the
coastlines of the planet
from time to time.
And I'm talking about tsunamis
that many of you are aware of.
There are a couple
of tsunamis that
had happened to
Japan and Indonesia
in the last few decades.
I'm talking about tsunamis
that would dwarf those.
We now know that
those have happened.
We can find the evidence of
those events having occurred.
Now, referring back to this
idea of the energy paradox,
what that means is that if
you're going to try to get rid
of 6,000,000 million cubic miles
of glacial ice in a few thousand
years, you've got to
have a lot of energy.
And where's that
energy coming from?
This was the paradox.
And there was some calculations
done saying, well, if you used--
it was assumed that the
primary source of such energy
would have to be the
sun, solar irradiation.
So what they did was
they started looking.
The geographers came
in and started looking.
The solar sciences started
looking, well, where on Earth
would you have the greatest
availability of solar irradiance
to melt ice?
And it turned out to
be tropical oceans.
Well, then this is where the
paradox came in because they
didn't do their calculations.
They said, well, if you took the
entire mass of ice over North
America and moved it
to the tropical oceans,
it would still take 20,000 to
30,000 years to melt the whole
thing.
So where does that leave us?
Well, this is the
energy paradox.
And so in order to
explain this, we
have to come up with a
source of inconceivable
magnitude of energy.
And I think there are
two potential sources.
One is direct impacts
into the oceans and ice
sheets of fragmented
cosmic bodies
like asteroids and comets.
And the other would be
tremendously powerful
solar storms.
There has been a recent paper
just published that puts
meltwater pulse 1A at the very
same time there appears to have
been a gigantic solar storm.
This is now dated
to around 14,300--
to 14,400 years ago.
How many of you heard
of the Carrington Event?
Happened in the 1800s, and it
was just after telegraphs had
been in place.
And I mean, it basically
blew out the telegraphs.
And now the Carrington
Event, what we now know
is that is a relatively
mild solar event.
This is another variable in this
equation of life on Earth that
we at some point in the long
range planning need to account
for the fact that unlike the
models of solar change that were
in place when, say, the first
climate models began to be
developed in late '80s and '90s
that led to the global warming
scenario, the interpretation
of the sun was expressed
in the term solar constant.
So in that model
of the sun, the sun
never changed enough to
really warrant being included
in the computer models.
Well, since then now we've
deployed a whole generation
of solar observing satellites.
We're also finding and observing
the activity of sun-like stars
nearby.
And what is leading us
to is the realization
that, yes, the
sun does sometimes
go through cyclical changes.
That it's not a solar
constant, that there
are tremendous
variations in the sun.
There's some new
research that I've
been exploring that
suggests there's
a relationship to the
infall of cometary masses
into the chromosphere that can
actually trigger solar storms.
I'm not going to get
into that too much today,
but I do talk about
that a lot in my podcast
and show the data, and so on.
So anyways, the Heinrich event--
what happens is they are these
periodic occurrences where
large masses of ice are
disgorged into the oceans,
primarily, coming from
the ice over Canada
and over Northwestern Europe.
It's almost as if there's
a gigantic breakup of ice,
and you have armadas of
thousands of icebergs disgorging
into the ocean.
Those icebergs then drift south.
And those icebergs
were glacial ice.
So when the glaciers are
moving over the land,
they're scooping up material,
the bedrock and the soil
and all of this stuff,
gravel, pulverizing it.
And that gets incorporated
into the glacial ice.
Then when the glacial ice
migrates to the coast.
And in that whatever it is that
triggers these Heinrich events,
you have this massive
convulsion of icebergs
discharging into the ocean.
They drift south.
And when they do this, they
begin to melt. And as they melt,
their cargo of gravel
and coarse material
falls to the ocean floor and
leaves very distinct layers.
And those can be dated.
And so from this
kind of evidence,
we can now begin to reconstruct
the ancient climate.
Before moving on, I'm just
going to show you one more.
Here's a great little depiction.
This is the Chalice Well
lid at Glastonbury Abbey.
And it shows a perfect
depiction of the Vesica Piscis.
And it connects it
directly with the idea
of the Holy Grail, which is
something that I also lecture on
because I think that
the Grail literature was
a vehicle for transmitting a lot
of really crucial information.
And if you know about
the quest of the Grail,
you understand that--
well, what was the
secret of the Grail?
Anybody can tell me, what
is the secret of the Grail?
It was that the king
and the land are one.
That was it.
And remember, if you
read the stories--
and I cannot recommend
highly enough reading some
of the stories by--
there are translations--
Wolfram von Eschenbach, Chrétien
de Troyes, Robert de Boron,
and the anonymous
author of "Parlez Vous."
This makes some
extraordinary reading.
But what you find there,
the quest of the Grail
was about the Grail
was the antidote
to the debilitating ailment
that the king was suffering
simultaneously with the land
around which had degenerated
into a wasteland.
And so the Grail
was the antidote
not only to the ailing
king but the ailing land.
And the recovery of the Grail
would not only restore the king,
but it would restore
the land as well,
that it would restore
the wasteland.
Well, interestingly, we
can look at things now,
and we know that the Arthurian
tales were centered right
around the year 540 AD.
In fact, the famous
battle of Camlann,
where Arthur fought to
death his son, Mordred,
is usually dated at 540 AD.
Well, six years from 536 to 542
AD were the four coldest years
of the last 2,000 years,
were the six coldest years
of the last 2,000.
536 AD was the single coldest
year of the last 2,000 years.
Subsequent to 536 AD,
for the next 10 years,
forest growth almost
came to a screeching halt
over the northern hemisphere.
Something major occurred
in the global climate.
It caused global cooling,
and literally, it
rendered the landscape of
the northern hemisphere
over large region into
a literal wasteland.
So we now know that there's this
correlation between something
that's been well documented
now through tree ring
records and all kinds
of other evidence
that fits precisely in
with the Grail stories.
So right there, I find
that that correlation
is profoundly important.
And it means that in
the Grail literature,
which all came out between
roughly 1,180 and 1,230,
in there in about a half a
century is dealing with that
epoch and has used that
epoch as a symbolical vehicle
for the transmission
of certain information.
Somebody over here said energy,
and I would agree with that.
Because I think
what we're actually
dealing with here in
the Grail literature
is a way of symbolically
encoding information
about a lost technology.
Hopefully, we'll have some
time to get into that,
but let's keep going.
Here's the overlay showing just
two examples of the link between
geometry and the
measure of time,
the length of the
platonic month,
or the average age 2,160 years.
The total degree measurement
of a cube is 2,160 degrees.
Now, if you go back and you
read your book of Revelation,
the Apokálypsis, you read
about the descent of the Holy
City out of the heavens.
And it's described as a cube.
And certain numbers
are given, which
I'm not going to get into today
because we'd run out of time.
But certain numbers
are given, key numbers,
sacred numbers that
are given to describe
the dimensions of this cube.
The important thing
is that the numbers
are part of the canon
of sacred numbers
that have come to us from many
venues all around the world.
And the fact that these
numbers can not only
be used to measure space
but also measure time.
You saw that the four seasons
of the great year were measured
as 6,480 years.
I will mention that at 6,480
years ago, given a few decades,
there was a major climate
shift from what was called
the Holocene Climatic
Optimum that followed the end
of the Great Ice Age where--
and this is true--
global climate temperatures
were up to 1 to 2 degrees
warmer than now.
You're not being told this
through mainstream media,
but this is true, and
it's well-documented.
At 6,480 years ago when the
vernal equinox was on the cusp
of Taurus, there was a major
and rapid climate shift that
the climatologists have called
the onset of the neoglaciation.
And there was a precipitous
drop in temperatures worldwide.
And there was also a
major cultural upheaval
that occurred consistent
with that date.
Now, 2,160 years later, we're
at the cusp of Taurus, Aries.
And this is usually
dated at 4,320.
If you study the cycles of
civilization and cultural
collapse, you'll find that there
was a major cultural collapse
that was typically dated at
4,300 years ago within 20 years
of that cusp.
Now, what I'm getting
at here, these examples
could be multiplied.
Were the ancient
peoples on to something?
Did they understand the cyclical
nature of global change?
I think the evidence is
getting very powerfully
supportive of that conclusion.
And then, if we go to Plato's
geometry of the universe,
the dodecahedron, the total
number of 12 pentagonal faces
each of which is measured by
540 degrees internal angle is
the total is 6,480 degrees.
So now this in turn becomes
a symbol for cosmic time.
And so we find the same
number measuring not only
the dodecahedron, which is
a model of cosmic space,
it's also measuring a
duration, a span of time
that we could call
cosmic time, and also
the pulse of
catastrophic episodes.
So double this, and you are
12,960 or within one century
of the Younger Dryas boundary.
And the evidence
now is suggesting
that the Younger Dryas
boundary occurred
because of a massive series
of cosmic impacts on Earth.
Now, I don't have time
to get into it today,
but there's evidence
accumulating
that the delivery of potentially
Earth-crossing cosmic material
is occurring on
a cyclical basis.
Now, I think this is something
that perhaps our ancestors were
aware of and why they were so
obsessively observing the night
sky.
Now, let's look at some
of these numbers here.
"In the second book was the
history of the ten kings
of the Chaldeans."
This is from Alexander
Polyhistor in his Commentaries
on Berossus.
And the periods of each reign,
which consisted collectively
of a hundred and twenty shar's,
or four hundred and thirty-two
thousand years; reaching
to the time of the deluge."
432,000 years.
This is the number that we
find recurring repeatedly.
So here's the pre-diluvian
god kings of Sumeria.
And you can look down the years
of the reign on the right.
And all of these are part of
our canon of cosmic numbers.
And then they all
total to 432,000.
You will notice that
Amemnon, the King Amemnon--
and I don't necessarily
think these are literal.
I think they're symbolical, but
the reign was given as 43,280
years.
Add an extra 0 on to
that, and then you've
got the total reigns of the
10 pre-diluvian, antediluvian
kings that reigned
before the Great Flood.
Then if we go to the
tabulations of the Vedic ages,
we see that they pick up where
the Sumerian ages leave off.
So they start with their
Kali Yuga at 432,000 years.
And then you've got--
it goes through a
series of 1, 2, 3, 4.
So you double the
432,000, you get 864,000.
You triple it,
you get 1,296,000.
And then times 4 is 1,000,728.
And then you add those
together, and you
get the age of the
Maha Yuga or Great Yuga
and it's exactly 10
times the Kali Yuga.
So again, we have this
repetition and emphasis
upon the number 432.
And we're going to learn that
there is a reason for this.
Now in the Vedas we
find verses like this.
And this is how it was encoded.
"So let the Brahman hear
the praise we utter.
This hast the four
horned buffalo emitted.
Four are his horns, three
are the feet that bear him;
his heads are two, his
hands are seven in number."
So there we have
the 4, 3, and 2.
And this is a way that
these numbers were encoded.
Now, here is from the late '70s,
which has been confirmed over
and over again.
Here you can see that
red line represents
the current temperature, the
regime that we're in now.
And this is going
back 400,000 years.
And what you see
here it's not exact,
but it's a regular repetition
of glacial interglacial cycles.
Now, this is coming
very close to conforming
to the ancient model.
And everything you see
above that red line
would be an interglacial, and
every trough would be a glacial.
And then you have
these areas in between.
So what this is
telling us is if we
were going to use this kind of
a graph to predict what's ahead,
I would suggest that
there's probably
a greater danger
of global cooling
than there is of global warming.
If we go to the
next slide, this is
your long-term global
temperature changes.
These have been reconstructed
from multiple proxies.
If we go back, we
can see departure
from present day temperature
on the left, the Y axis.
The X axis, we're going
back to the Late Cretaceous,
over 65 million years ago.
And what you see is that
the modern, the Pleistocene,
look where the Pleistocene is.
The Pleistocene is
this right here.
Now, if you were going to
look at this graph, which
has been replicated over
and over again, confirmed
by all kinds of
independent evidence,
if you were to look
at this, what would
you say is the
anomalous temperature
regime of the planet?
Well, clearly, it's this.
This is the period where I said
characterized by the oscillation
of glacial interglacial ages.
And it's the coldest period
of the last 65 million years.
So when we talk
about, well, what
is the normal
temperature of the Earth?
It all depends on our
frame of reference.
So the thing is, is when-- to
create the campaign of fear
over global warming,
the frames of references
are very carefully chosen to
convey one particular impression
and exclude others.
This shows-- this is
another thing that is never
talked about, but
it happens to be
true, well verified for
probably at least 100 years now.
This shows-- on the
bottom here what
it's showing you here is parts
per million of carbon dioxide.
And up on the left-hand side,
it says the net downtrending
forcing in watts
per square meter.
What does that mean?
In simple terms,
what that is it's
talking abut you understand
the whole scenario is this,
you have shortwave
radiation coming through,
penetrating through
the atmosphere.
Penetrates through the
greenhouse gases of water vapor,
greenhouse gases like methane,
carbon dioxide, ozone.
Penetrates down.
It's absorbed into the Earth.
And then that
energy is reradiated
at longwave wavelengths
roughly in the window
of about 14 to 17 microns.
OK.
Now what happens is that if you
look at this graph, what it's
telling you, this blue
line is showing you
the greenhouse capacity
of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere.
What you see when you look
at this graph is that--
and when you're talking
about downward forcing,
it's talking about the
canopy of greenhouse gases
captures that heat, and
then reradiates some of it
back down to the Earth.
That's the idea.
Then that warms the
lower troposphere.
But what you see here is
that most of that heating
effect of carbon dioxide is in
the first 100 parts per million.
And then it rapidly diminishes.
Logarithmically, we can actually
look at another graph here,
and you can actually,
barely see it.
Look at this here from 0 up
to 250 watts per square meter,
you can see from this that
almost all of the heat
captures within the first
100 parts per million.
And then it tapers
off to almost nothing.
This is well-known.
And they've had to
manipulate computer models
to obscure this fact that
the ability of carbon dioxide
to capture additional heat
beyond what it already
has is almost nil.
And I could spend a whole hour
or two talking about this.
I'm not.
I just wanted to bring
that to your attention
because there are narratives
that have been concocted
that are now being
used to instill fear
in people, which is,
ultimately, a tool of control.
So this is just a graphic that
will show you the dramatic
changes between, say,
15,000 years ago and now.
So that's your 6,000,000 and
7,000,000 million cubic miles
of ice that you
have to get rid of.
Here's one of the founding
fathers of modern climatology,
Hermann Flohn.
He's worth reading.
But let me tell you
what he discovered.
And this goes back and
has not been disproven.
It's only been
confirmed since then.
This was 1979 "From the
viewpoint of the climatologist,
the most important result
of these investigations
is the fact that within the
human timescale of about
100 years or less, our
climate is much more
variable than hitherto assumed.
Especially important,
and indeed disquieting,
is the evidence of abrupt
coolings within warm
interglacial periods, apparently
as rare events with a recurrence
interval of 10,000 years."
Remember, I said, we're in the
current Holocene is 11,600.
So we've already gone
beyond any previous
by a millennia or two
any previous period
of comparable warmth.
And then he goes on to
say that "The problem
of abrupt intense cooling
during the interglacial climate
similar to the present climate
resembles, to some extent,
the Damocles' sword hanging
high above the globe
and its inhabitants.
Because of its possible
consequence for the human race,
its study deserves a
much higher priority."
I read this paper when it came
out in 1979 and then in 1980
when I heard that the
United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change
was going to establish the IPCC
to study climate change
at much deeper, in greater
depth and detail, I
thought, yes, we need that.
We need to know what's
going on with this.
Well, you can
understand, I hope,
why I was dismayed when I
realized that this was not
going to be about science.
This was actually a
political institution.
And they had a preset agenda,
which is easily demonstrable.
They had a preset
agenda to demonstrate
the anthropogenic component
exclusively on climate change.
And basically, the
stuff that Hermann Flohn
is saying that we really
need to be studying
got shunted off to the side.
Most people don't know
this, and it's important
that we do know this.
And here's something that
I think may even shock you.
This is the last 10,000 years.
This is based upon ice cores.
What this showing here, the
graph of the last 10,000 years
of temperature change is
preserved in Greenland ice cores
shows temperature and constantly
and repeatedly warming
and cooling 2 to 3
Fahrenheit or more.
So what you're seeing
here is not a smooth line.
It's a jagged line.
It's constantly upping
and downing as much as 2
to 3 degrees.
Colder, warmer, colder, warmer.
And this we can see reflected in
many proxies from the Holocene.
And here's where it
gets interesting.
If we go back beyond the
Holocene into the Pleistocene,
now bear in mind what
we're looking at here.
If you look at this closely,
you'll see, for example,
there's a spike of
cold right here.
That spike of cold would be
enough to pretty much terminate
modern civilization
as we know it.
Why?
Because that spike of cold was
3 or 4 degrees colder than now.
It lasted for several years.
If something like that
were to happen now,
it means that for
those several years,
you'd have major global
agricultural collapses.
And within two to
three years, people
would be starving to death.
And by getting weak
because of hunger,
their immune systems get weak.
And that's why you always say
that the ancients have told
us pestilence follows famine.
Because pestilence is when you
have weakened immune systems,
that creates the opportunity
for infectious diseases
to spread rapidly.
And so that right there is
about a 2 to 3-degree cooling.
Actually, maybe even
4 degrees cooling.
It lasted maybe up to a decade.
Something like that
would happen now,
we'd be profoundly stressed.
But I want you to look at
something when we go back
into the Pleistocene.
Here's the same graph, and
I'm going to extend it back.
If you tell me that the
climate science has settled,
I'm going to demand that
you explain this to me.
This graph right here.
We're looking at
temperature changes
of up to 10 and 12
degrees centigrade, which
is up to 18 degrees
Fahrenheit-- guess what--
in less than five years, maybe
even less than three years.
And, in fact, some
of the evidence
suggests that some of
these temperature changes
occurred within one year.
I think it's imperative that we
come to a deeper understanding
of what's going on here.
Because this is the record of
the last couple of 100,000 years
on Earth.
And this is the world that our
ancestors were surviving in.
"From measurements of annual
ice-layer thickness over
the past 15,000 years,
the authors find that
Greenland's climate, emerging
from the last ice age,
twice shifted from glacial to
interglacial conditions over
an astonishingly quick
three to five years."
And here this is
just a large part
of the graph we just looked at.
And you'll see that there are
two shifts to the left are cold,
shifts to the right are warm.
You're going to see that we
have two extreme warming events.
The lower one is meltwater pulse
associated with meltwater pulse
1B, which is probably related
to something that occurred with
the sun.
The second one is
the Younger Dryas.
Actually, the end
of the Younger Dryas
and the subsidence
of Plato's Atlantis,
that second red arrow there.
And those two
warming events were
associated with two very rapid
melting of the ice sheets,
extraordinarily and extreme
catastrophic climatic
and weather events
that were compressed
within that narrow
window, which I submit
led to things like
torrential rain
falls that might have
lasted for weeks at a time.
And I've taken many people
out on tours and excursions
to teach them and show
them, reveal to them
the evidence of this kind
of events in the landscape
because the landscapes have
preserved this evidence for us.
I've gone.
I've-- in fact, my previous
trips to Las Vegas was because I
was using Vegas as a jumping off
point to go out, for example,
into the Mojave Desert.
And I've taken groups
out there to show
that the imprint of
gigantic, catastrophic events
like torrential rain falls,
biblical scale rainfalls,
have left their imprints in the
deserts of the United States.
[MUSIC PLAYING]